lophat-py/README.md, before:

<div align="center">

<h1>LoPHAT</h1>

<b>Lo</b>ckfree <b>P</b>ersistent <b>H</b>omology <b>A</b>lgorithm <b>T</b>oolbox

[![crates.io](https://img.shields.io/crates/v/lophat)](https://crates.io/crates/lophat)
[![PyPi](https://img.shields.io/pypi/v/lophat)](https://pypi.org/project/lophat/)
[![docs.rs](https://img.shields.io/docsrs/lophat?label=Docs.rs)](https://docs.rs/lophat/latest/lophat/)
<!--[![Read the Docs](https://img.shields.io/readthedocs/lophat?label=Read%20The%20Docs)]()-->

</div>

## Overview

LoPHAT is a Rust library implementing the lockfree algorithm for computing persistent homology (PH), introduced in [[1]](#1).
Python bindings are provided via PyO3, with an interface familiar to those who have used PHAT [[2]](#2).

The primary goal of this library is to make the algorithm accessible to those wishing to compute PH of ___arbitrary filtered chain complexes___.
In particular, LoPHAT is **not** specialised to compute PH of common filtrations or even filtered simplicial complexes.
As such, you should expect LoPHAT to under-perform as compared to [giotto-ph [3]](#3) or [oineus  [4]](#4), both of which use the algorithm of [[1]](#1).

The only changes from the algorithm described in [[1]](#1) are:
* We use the `pinboard` library for memory managment of the matrices.
* We store the $j^{th}$ column of $R$ and $V$ alongside each other in memory, allowing a full $R=DV$ decomposition (rather than just computing pairings).
* Rather than split the matrix into chunks, we use a work-stealing paradigm, via the `rayon` library.

> **Warning**
> LoPHAT is currently in alpha.
> The implementation is not optimised, the API is not fixed and tests are limited.
> Use at your own risk.

## Usage in Python

The Python bindings can be installed via
```shell
pip install lophat
```
This provides you with two functions, both of which return the diagram as a set of paired columns and a set of unpaired columns.
They both compute these pairings via $R=DV$ decomposition but via different algorithms
* `compute_pairings_serial` - using standard algorithm, in serial;
* `compute_pairings` - using the lockfree algorithm of [[1]](#1).

For example usage, consult the file `example.py`

## TODO

- [ ] Implement clearing optimisation when V not required
- [ ] Increase property testing
- [ ] Write unit tests
- [ ] Write Python documentation
- [ ] Benchmark
- [ ] Add alternative column representations
- [ ] Abstract out matrix trait

## References

<a id="1">[1]</a> Morozov, Dmitriy, and Arnur Nigmetov.
"Towards lockfree persistent homology."
Proceedings of the 32nd ACM Symposium on Parallelism in Algorithms and Architectures. 2020.

<a id="2">[2]</a> Bauer, Ulrich, et al.
"Phat–persistent homology algorithms toolbox." Journal of symbolic computation 78 (2017): 76-90.
[Bitbucket](https://bitbucket.org/phat-code/phat/src/master/)

<a id="3">[3]</a> Pérez, Julián Burella, et al.
"giotto-ph: A python library for high-performance computation of persistent homology of Vietoris-Rips filtrations."
arXiv preprint [arXiv:2107.05412](https://arxiv.org/abs/2107.05412) (2021).
[GitHub](https://github.com/giotto-ai/giotto-ph)

<a id="4">[4]</a> Nigmetov, Arnur, Morozov, Dmitriy, and USDOE.
Oineus v1.0. Computer software.
[https://www.osti.gov//servlets/purl/1774764](https://www.osti.gov//servlets/purl/1774764). USDOE. 1 Apr. 2021.
Web. [doi:10.11578/dc.20210407.1](https://doi.org/10.11578/dc.20210407.1). [GitHub](https://github.com/anigmetov/oineus)

Commit message:

Add new README to lophat-py

lophat-py/README.md, after:

<div align="center">

<h1>LoPHAT</h1>

<b>Lo</b>ckfree <b>P</b>ersistent <b>H</b>omology <b>A</b>lgorithm <b>T</b>oolbox

[![crates.io](https://img.shields.io/crates/v/lophat)](https://crates.io/crates/lophat)
[![PyPi](https://img.shields.io/pypi/v/lophat)](https://pypi.org/project/lophat/)
[![docs.rs](https://img.shields.io/docsrs/lophat?label=Docs.rs)](https://docs.rs/lophat/latest/lophat/)
<!--[![Read the Docs](https://img.shields.io/readthedocs/lophat?label=Read%20The%20Docs)]()-->

</div>

## Overview

LoPHAT is a Rust library implementing the lockfree algorithm for computing persistent homology (PH), introduced in [[1]](#1).
Python bindings are provided via PyO3, with an interface familiar to those who have used PHAT [[2]](#2).

The primary goal of this library is to make the algorithm accessible to those wishing to compute PH of ___arbitrary filtered chain complexes___.
In particular, LoPHAT is **not** specialised to compute PH of common filtrations or even filtered simplicial complexes.
As such, you should expect LoPHAT to under-perform as compared to [giotto-ph [3]](#3) or [oineus  [4]](#4), both of which use the algorithm of [[1]](#1).

The only changes from the algorithm described in [[1]](#1) are:
* We use the `pinboard` library for memory managment of the matrices.
* We store the $j^{th}$ column of $R$ and $V$ alongside each other in memory, allowing a full $R=DV$ decomposition (rather than just computing pairings).
* Rather than split the matrix into chunks, we use a work-stealing paradigm, via the `rayon` library.

> **Warning**
> LoPHAT is currently in alpha.
> The implementation is not optimised, the API is not fixed and tests are limited.
> Use at your own risk.

## Usage in Python

The Python bindings can be installed via
```shell
pip install lophat
```
If this fails, it is probably `pip` trying to install from source without a `cargo` toolchain present.
To force installing from binary run
```shell
pip install --only-binary lophat lophat
```
This provides you with two functions, both of which return the diagram as a set of paired columns and a set of unpaired columns.
They both compute these pairings via $R=DV$ decomposition but via different algorithms
* `compute_pairings_serial` - using standard algorithm, in serial;
* `compute_pairings` - using the lockfree algorithm of [[1]](#1).

For example usage, consult the file `example.py` or [this Google colab notebook](https://colab.research.google.com/drive/1y0_wZfvuUZfRreYPO50mo4rBlflkMcfj?usp=sharing)

## TODO

- [ ] Implement clearing optimisation when V not required
- [ ] Increase property testing
- [ ] Write unit tests
- [ ] Write Python documentation
- [ ] Benchmark
- [ ] Add alternative column representations
- [ ] Abstract out matrix trait

## References

<a id="1">[1]</a> Morozov, Dmitriy, and Arnur Nigmetov.
"Towards lockfree persistent homology."
Proceedings of the 32nd ACM Symposium on Parallelism in Algorithms and Architectures. 2020.

<a id="2">[2]</a> Bauer, Ulrich, et al.
"Phat–persistent homology algorithms toolbox." Journal of symbolic computation 78 (2017): 76-90.
[Bitbucket](https://bitbucket.org/phat-code/phat/src/master/)

<a id="3">[3]</a> Pérez, Julián Burella, et al.
"giotto-ph: A python library for high-performance computation of persistent homology of Vietoris-Rips filtrations."
arXiv preprint [arXiv:2107.05412](https://arxiv.org/abs/2107.05412) (2021).
[GitHub](https://github.com/giotto-ai/giotto-ph)

<a id="4">[4]</a> Nigmetov, Arnur, Morozov, Dmitriy, and USDOE.
Oineus v1.0. Computer software.
[https://www.osti.gov//servlets/purl/1774764](https://www.osti.gov//servlets/purl/1774764). USDOE. 1 Apr. 2021.
Web. [doi:10.11578/dc.20210407.1](https://doi.org/10.11578/dc.20210407.1). [GitHub](https://github.com/anigmetov/oineus)
